Figure 3.20 Percent Change for Gross Domestic Product for Japan, 2010-202014 The formula to calculate the percentage change from one quarter to the next is In the first quarter of 2013, the real GDP for Japan was 522,594.2 billion yen. In the second quarter of 2013, the real GDP had risen to 527,277.0 billion yen. Thus, the percentage change in real GDP from quarter one to quarter two was As long as the percentage change for a quarter is positive, the real GDP in Figure 3.20 will rise; this indicates that the economy is growing. If the percentage change shown in Figure 3.20 is negative, then real GDP will fall; this indicates that the economy is contracting. Looking at the percentage change in Figure 3.20 is helpful for detecting when the economy is growing but the growth is slowing. If the percentage change is positive but lower than it was for the previous quarter, then GDP is growing, but the growth rate is slowing. Indexes An index is created to track the performance of a particular aspect of the economy or the financial markets. An index helps compare the level of a variable at one point in time relative to another point in time. Indexes are often used when movement over time is more important than the absolute level of the variable at any one point in time. Earlier in this chapter, we looked at the rate of change in the CPI to measure the rate of inflation. In its raw form, the CPI is an index. Remember that the CPI is a measure of the cost of a market basket of goods. When the index is created, the total cost of the market basket, whether it is $300 or $950, is irrelevant. What economists are interested in is the magnitude of the difference in cost of the same market basket at a later date. In order to focus on the change over time, a base year is identified. The cost of the market basket in the base 13 Data from JP, Cabinet Office. "Real Gross Domestic Product for Japan (JPNRGDPEXP)." FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed July 7, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/JPNRGDPEXP 14 Data from JP, Cabinet Office. "Real Gross Domestic Product for Japan (JPNRGDPEXP)." FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed July 7, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/JPNRGDPEXP 3.6 • Sources and Characteristics of Economic Data 93