increased, so did cost of goods sold, but it increased at the same proportion as sales. No improvement or decline occurred in the company's cost of goods sold. The same is true for rent, depreciation, and utilities expenses. One key item did change slightly as a percentage: salaries expense. The 2 percent decrease in operating income from the prior year's 38 percent to the current year's 36 percent was caused by the increase in salaries expense as a percentage of sales. Net income, however, only declined by 1 percent from 30 percent in the prior year to 29 percent in the current year because interest expense dropped by 1 percent, offsetting the 2 percent increase in salaries expense. Figure 5.24 Common-Size Income Statement LINK TO LEARNING Common-Size Income Statement Visit the Apple, Inc. Common-Size Income Statement (https://openstax.org/r/common-size-income- statement) provided by the Stock Analysis on Net website. Review the company's cost of sales, gross profit, operating income, other income, and net income percentages for the current and prior year. What can you learn about the company's recent performance in these areas? Has it improved or declined, or has it simply changed incrementally with gross sales? On the Clear Lake Sporting Goods' common-size balance sheet, we see that current assets remained at 80 percent of total assets from the prior to current year (see Figure 5.25). The mix of current assets that comprise that 80 percent changed only slightly with a 1 percent decrease in cash, 2 percent increase in accounts receivable, 2 percent decrease in inventory, and no change in short-term investments. Noncurrent assets includes only equipment. While the balance in the equipment account did change as a percentage of total assets, equipment remained the same at 20 percent. On the debt and equity side of the balance sheet, however, there were a few percentage changes worth noting. In the prior year, the balance sheet reflected 55 percent debt and 45 percent equity. In the current year, that balance shifted to 60 percent debt and 40 percent equity. The firm did issue additional stock and showed an increase in retained earnings, both totaling a $10,000 increase in equity. However, the equity increase was much smaller than the total increase in liabilities of $40,000. Long-term debt increased by only $10,000 by issuing additional notes payable. The remainder of that increase is seen in the 5 percent increase in current liabilities. In that increase, most of it was in unearned revenue. 5.7 • Common-Size Statements 153