4.2 Economic Basis for Accrual Accounting Learning Outcomes By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Assess the impact of business transactions on cash flow. • Define double-entry accounting and explain how it supports the accounting equation. How and when we record our transactions can have a significant impact on financial statements, especially the income statement (net income). In this section you will explore the impact business transactions have on financial statements under each method. In doing so, you'll be introduced to double-entry accounting and see how it functions to support the accounting equation. Timing of Business Activity versus Cash Flow The first financial statement prepared is the income statement, a statement that shows the organization's financial performance for a given period of time. We already saw that Chris, who is a sole proprietor, started a summer landscaping business on August 1, 2020. She categorized her business as a service entity and used the cash-basis method of accounting to record the initial operations for her business. Although Chris was using her family's tractor to get her work done, she was responsible for paying for fuel and any maintenance costs. So, on August 31, Chris realized she had only $250 in her checking account. This balance was lower than expected because she had spent only slightly less ($1,150 for brakes, fuel, and insurance) than she earned ($1,400)-leaving a net income of $250. While she would like the checking balance to grow each month, she realized that most of the August expenses were infrequent (brakes and insurance) and the insurance, in particular, was an unusually large expense. She knew that the checking account balance would likely grow more in September because she would earn money from some new customers; she also anticipated having fewer expenses. This simple landscaping example can be used to discuss the elements of the income statement, which are revenues, expenses, gains, and losses for a particular period of time (see Figure 4.2). Together, these determine whether the organization has net income (where revenues and gains are greater than expenses and losses) or net loss (where expenses and losses are greater than revenues and gains). Revenues, expenses, gains, and losses are further defined in the Income Statement provided. Figure 4.2 Income Statement for Chris's Landscaping The income statement can also be visualized by the formula: Let's change this example slightly and assume the $1,000 payment to the insurance company will be paid in 104 4 • Accrual Accounting Process Access for free at openstax.org