inventory and prepaid expenses to cash can sometimes take more time than the liquidation of other current assets. A company will want to know what it has on hand and can use quickly if an immediate obligation is due. The formula for the quick ratio is The quick ratio for Clear Lake Sporting Goods in the current year is A 1.6:1 ratio means the company has enough quick assets to cover current liabilities. It's again key to note that a single ratio shouldn't be used out of context. A 1.6 ratio is difficult to interpret on its own. Industry averages and trend analysis for Clear Lake Sporting Goods would also be helpful in giving the ratio more meaning. LINK TO LEARNING Target Corporation As we have learned, the quick ratio shows how quickly a company can liquidate current assets to cover current liabilities. Look through the financial statements in the 2019 Annual Report for Target (https://openstax.org/r/annual-report-for-target) and calculate the quick ratio. What does the outcome mean for Target? Cash Ratio Cash is the most liquid asset a company has, and cash ratio is often used by investors and lenders to asses an organization's liquidity. It represents the firm's cash and cash equivalents divided by current liabilities and is a more conservative look at a firm's liquidity than the current or quick ratios. The ratio is reflected as a number, not a percentage. A cash ratio of 1.0 means the firm has enough cash to cover all current liabilities if something happened and it was required to pay all current debts immediately. A ratio of less than 1.0 means the firm has more current liabilities than it has cash on hand. A ratio of more than 1.0 means it has enough cash on hand to pay all current liabilities and still have cash left over. While a ratio greater than 1.0 may sound ideal, it's important to consider the specifics of the company. Sitting on idle cash is not ideal, as the cash could be used to earn a return. And having a ratio less than 1.0 isn't always bad, as many firms operate quite successfully with a ratio of less than 1.0. Comparing the company ratio with trend analysis and with industry averages will help provide more insight. The cash ratio for Clear Lake Sporting Goods in the current year is: A 1.1 ratio means the company has enough cash to cover current liabilities. 6.3 • Liquidity Ratios 173