• Land next to the production facility held for use next year as a place to build a warehouse • Land held for future resale when the value increases • Equipment used in the production process Solution: Expenditures: • Normal repair and maintenance on the manufacturing facility: expensed • Cost of taxes on new equipment used in business operations: capitalized • Shipping costs on new equipment used in business operations: capitalized • Cost of a minor repair on existing equipment used in business operations: expensed Assets: • Land next to the production facility held for use next year as a place to build a warehouse: property, plant, and equipment • Land held for future resale when the value increases: investment • Equipment used in the production process: property, plant, and equipment Why are the costs of putting a long-term asset into service capitalized and written off as expenses (depreciated) over the economic life of the asset? Let's return to Liam's start-up business as an example. Liam plans to buy a silk screen machine to help create clothing that they will sell. The machine is a long-term asset because it will be used in the business's daily operation for many years. If the machine costs Liam $5,000 and it is expected to be used in their business for several years, GAAP require the allocation of the machine's costs over its useful life, which is the period over which it will produce revenues. Overall, in determining a company's financial performance, we would not expect that Liam should have an expense of $5,000 this year and $0 in expenses for this machine for future years in which it is being used. GAAP addressed this through the expense recognition (matching) principle, which states that expenses should be recorded in the same period with the revenues that the expense helped create. In Liam's case, the $5,000 for this machine should be allocated over the years in which it helps to generate revenue for the business. Capitalizing the machine allows this to occur. As stated previously, to capitalize is to record a long-term asset on the balance sheet and expense its allocated costs on the income statement over the asset's economic life. Therefore, when Liam purchases the machine, they will record it as an asset on the financial statements (see journal entry in Figure 4.8). Figure 4.8 Journal Entry for Machine/Cash When capitalizing an asset, the total cost of acquiring the asset is included in the cost of the asset. This includes additional costs beyond the purchase price, such as shipping costs, taxes, assembly, and legal fees. For example, if a real estate broker is paid $8,000 as part of a transaction to purchase land for $100,000, the land would be recorded at a cost of $108,000. Over time, as the asset is used to generate revenue, Liam will need to depreciate recognize the cost of the asset. 3 In the Chapter 4 financial statements, a number contained within parentheses is a negative number, such as the "Accumulated depreciation and amortization" line item. 4.4 • When Should a Company Capitalize or Expense an Item? 113