prepared correctly, the total assets on the balance sheet equals the total liabilities and owner's equity sections of the balance sheet. The classified balance sheet is considered or termed classified when the assets and liabilities within the balance sheet are grouped into even smaller sections: current and noncurrent (see Figure 5.6). Both assets and liabilities are broken down on the balance sheet into current and noncurrent classifications in order to provide more detail and transparency as well as abide by the convention of reporting in descending order of liquidity. Current assets are those that can be used or converted to cash within a year. Common examples of current assets include cash, inventory, accounts receivable, and short-term investments. Assets that will be in use longer than a year are considered noncurrent. Common examples of noncurrent assets include notes receivable, machinery and equipment, buildings, and land. Just as we noted a few key differences in the income statements based on the type of firm, you may also notice a few slight differences in the balance sheet depending on the firm type. Clear Lake Sporting Goods is a retailer. Thus, you will see that their inventory for resale on their balance sheet is simply called "Inventory." This is the goods they have purchased for resale but have not yet sold. A manufacturer, like Apple, Inc. in the Link to Learning sections, will have a variety of inventory types including raw materials, work in progress, and finished goods inventory. These represent the various states of the inventory (ready to use, partially complete, and fully completed product). A service firm, on the other hand, may not have inventory at all. If it does, it may be simple goods it uses to help deliver its service. For example, a cleaning company may keep an inventory of cleaning supplies. Figure 5.6 Graphical Representation of the Accounting Equation Both assets and liabilities are categorized as current and noncurrent. Clear Lake Sporting Goods has cash, accounts receivable, inventory, short-term investments, and equipment. It rents its facilities, so it has no buildings on its balance sheets. Of all its assets, only the equipment is long term. The assets section for Clear Lake's classified balance sheet is shown in Figure 5.7. Figure 5.7 Assets Section of Classified Balance Sheet THINK IT THROUGH Current and Noncurrent Assets Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and locate the company's balance sheet (the balance sheet begins on page 33). What types of current assets 5.2 • The Balance Sheet 135