We know that Charlie is a bigger retailer, and we see this clearly in the rent expense as a percentage of sales. Charlie spends 11 percent of its sales on building rent, while Clear Lake spends only 5 percent. A clear difference in performance is hinted at here, alluding to Charlie spending more per square foot on rent or using its retail space differently, causing it to rent more space for its product per sales dollar than Clear Lake does. Depreciation expense, though not a large figure, is smaller for Charlie, giving us a hint that Charlie has less capital equipment than Clear Lake, perhaps tied to the higher rent expense. It is possible that Charlie rents some of its equipment, which would help explain the higher rent percentage. Finally, Charlie's salaries percentage is significantly higher at 12 percent than Clear Lake's 5 percent. Though the simple percentage does not tell us why, it does provide us a hint and allow for further questions or investigation. Charlie may pay its employees a much higher wage than Clear Lake. They may also have far more sales associates on the floor in their larger spaces than Clear Lake does in their smaller retail spaces. Note that although we have compared just two years of data for Charlie and Clear Lake, it is more common to use several years of data to get a more robust view of long-term trends. Figure 5.26 Comparison of Common-Size Income Statements LINK TO LEARNING Microsoft versus Apple Locate the sales, cost of goods sold, and gross profit data for Microsoft (https://openstax.org/r/microsoft- financial)'s most current period using Yahoo! Finance. Calculate the common-size percentage for cost of goods sold and gross profit (cost of goods sold divided by net sales, and gross profit divided by net sales). Compare these percentages to those of Apple, Inc (https://openstax.org/r/common-size-income- statement)., a key competitor, on its common-size income statement. What can you learn about the performance of each firm based on these two percentages? Now that you have covered the basic financial statements and a little bit about how they are used, where do we find them? How often are they prepared? Who gets them? In this next section we will explore the requirements for what needs to be reported, when, and to whom. 5.7 • Common-Size Statements 155