Figure 6.6 Weighted Shares If the shares were not weighted, the calculation would not consider the time period during which the shares were outstanding. To illustrate how earnings per share is calculated, assume Clear Lake Sporting Goods earns $35,000 in net income during the current year. During the year, the company also declared a $5,000 dividend on preferred stock and a $6,000 dividend on common stock. The company had 8,000 common shares outstanding the entire year. Clear Lake Sporting Goods has generated $3.75 of earnings ($35,000 less the $5,000 of preferred dividends) for each of the 8,000 common shares of stock it has outstanding. Measuring Performance with Earnings per Share Earnings per share is a key profitability measure that both current and potential common stockholders monitor. Its importance is accentuated by the fact that GAAP requires public companies to report earnings per share on the face of a company's income statement. This is the only ratio that requires such prominent reporting. If fact, public companies are required to report two different earnings per share amounts on their income statements-basic and diluted. We've illustrated the calculation of basic earnings per share. Diluted earnings per share, which is not demonstrated here, involves the consideration of all securities, such as stocks and bonds, that could potentially dilute, or reduce, the basic earnings per share. LINK TO LEARNING Finding Earning per Share for Public Companies Where can you find earnings per share information on public companies? Use the Yahoo! Finance (https://openstax.org/r/yahoo-finance) website to look up stock and earnings per share data for Tellurian Inc. (TELL), Amazon (AMZN), or CVS Pharmacy (CVS). Or use the search function to search for earnings per share data for your favorite corporation. Enter the ticker for the company you are looking up, and a basic chart and graph will display with stock price data along with several commonly used ratios (including earnings per share). As you review data, keep in mind that a company can manipulate or impact its earnings per share by issuing new shares or buying back issued shares. What are the ethical implications of earnings per share calculations? Common stock shares are normally purchased by investors to generate income through dividends or to sell at a profit in the future. Investors realize that inadequate earnings per share can result in poor or inconsistent dividend payments and fluctuating stock prices. As such, companies seek to produce earnings per share amounts that rise each period. However, an increase in earnings per share may not always reflect favorable performance, as there are multiple reasons that earnings per share may increase. One way earnings per share can increase is through increased net income. On the other hand, it can also increase when a company buys back its own shares of stock. For example, assume that Clear Lake Sporting Goods generated net income of $30,000 and paid out $3,000 in 178 6 • Measures of Financial Health Access for free at openstax.org