means that the account value could have been quite different on the day before or the day after the date of the balance sheet. For example, if a firm were concerned with certain ratios or investor/lender expectations of its cash balance, it could choose to not pay several vendor payments in the last week of December. Thus, on December 31, the firm reflects a high cash balance on its balance sheet. However, by the end of the first week of January, it has caught up on late vendor payments and again shows a low cash balance. Finally, there are many possible things of value that are not recorded on the balance sheet. Internally generated assets and the firm's human capital are two common examples. Internally generated assets can be anything from a website, a process, to an idea. 5.3 The Relationship between the Balance Sheet and the Income Statement Learning Outcomes By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Identify connected elements between the balance sheet and the income statement. • Differentiate between expenses and payables. Net Income and Retained Earnings As mentioned earlier, the financial statements are linked by certain elements and thus must be prepared in a certain order. The income statement was first since net income (or loss) is a required figure in preparing the balance sheet. During the period close process, all temporary accounts are closed to the income summary account, which is then closed to retained earnings. All revenue and expense accounts are closed since they are temporary. The net result is either net profit or net loss as the balance in the income summary account. Remember that the retained earnings account reflects all income the firm has earned since its inception less any dividends paid out to shareholders. Thus the result (net income) of the income statement feeds the retained earnings account on the balance sheet. Retained earnings is also an element of the statement of stockholders' equity, which we will cover later in this chapter. In Figure 5.10, we see net income in the current year of $35,000, which was added to the company's prior year retained earnings balance of $15,000. Notice, however, that the prior year balance was $15,000, and the current year balance is only $20,000. It does not total $50,000 as we might have expected. Remember, retained earnings represents all earnings since inception less any dividends paid out. Clear Lake Sporting Goods must have paid out $30,000 in dividends in the current year. We will see this information laid out in the statement of retained earnings. In the prior year they began with a $10,000 balance in retained earnings. Income of $30,000 increased retained earnings and dividends paid back out to investors reduced retained earnings, leaving an ending balance in the prior year of $15,000. This rolls over and is the beginning balance for the current year. In the current year Clear Lake had net income of $35,000 and paid $30,000 of their earnings out to shareholders, essentially resulting in a $5,000 increase to the retained earnings account. Figure 5.10 Statement of Retained Earnings Now we can see the full flow of information from the income statement to the statement of retained earnings (Figure 5.10) and finally to the balance sheet. Clear Lake's net income flows from the income statement into 138 5 • Financial Statements Access for free at openstax.org