locate the company's balance sheet (it begins on page 33). What types of equity accounts does it report? Solution: Apple reports common stock, retained earnings, and accumulated other comprehensive income. Distributions to Owners When firms earn a profit, they have two options as to what to do with their earnings. They can keep (retain) them and reinvest them back into the business, or they can pay them out to their shareholders in the form of dividends. Dividends are commonly in the form of cash, but dividends can be paid out in the form of stock or other assets as well. To pay a cash dividend, the firm must have enough cash on hand and sufficient retained earnings. They cannot pay out a dividend beyond the retained earnings available. Some companies issue shares of stock as a dividend rather than cash or property. This often occurs when the company has insufficient cash but wants to keep its investors happy. When a company issues a stock dividend, it distributes additional shares of stock to existing shareholders. A property dividend occurs when the firm pays out dividends in the form of something other than stock or cash, often one of their assets or something they hold in inventory. For example, Walt Disney Company may choose to distribute tickets to visit its theme parks. A property dividend may be declared when a company wants to reward its investors but doesn't have the cash to distribute, or if it needs to hold on to its existing cash for other investments. Remember, the retained earnings account reflects the cumulative earnings of a firm since they began business, less dividends paid out to shareholders. This includes all forms of dividends (cash, stock, and other assets). Note that dividends are distributed or paid only to shares of stock that are outstanding. Treasury shares are not outstanding, so no dividends are declared or distributed for these shares. Regardless of the type of dividend, the declaration always causes a decrease in the retained earnings account. THINK IT THROUGH Dividends Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020. Review the notes to the financial statements found on pages 19 and 20. What kind of dividends did the company pay (cash, property, stock)? Review the notes regarding dividends on page 26. What does Apple intend to do regarding dividends in the future, pending board approval? Solution: Apple issued cash dividends. On page 26, it notes that the company intends to increase the dividend annually, pending approval by the board. Elements of the Statement of Owner's Equity Now that we have covered the basic elements of equity and know what dividends are, we have the basic pieces we need to create the statement of owner's equity. The statement is broken out into columns, one for each element of equity: common stock, preferred stock, additional paid-in capital, retained earnings, and treasury stock. The first line of the statement provides the balance of each segment as of the first day of the period. Each 142 5 • Financial Statements Access for free at openstax.org