depreciation the process of allocating the costs of a tangible asset over the asset's economic life double-entry accounting an accounting method that requires the sum of the debits to equal the sum of the credits for each transaction expense a cost associated with providing goods or services expense recognition (also, matching principle) matches expenses with associated revenues in the period in which the revenues were generated gains increases in organizational value from activities that are "incidental or peripheral" to the primary purpose of the business income statement a financial statement that measures the organization's financial performance for a given period of time long-term asset asset used in the normal, ongoing course of business for more than one year that is not intended to be resold losses decreases in organizational value from activities that are "incidental or peripheral" to the primary purpose of the business net income income earned when revenues and gains are greater than expenses and losses revenue inflows or other enhancements of assets of an entity or settlements of its liabilities (or a combination of both) from delivering or producing goods, rendering services, or other activities that constitute the entity's ongoing major or central operations revenue recognition principle stating that a company must recognize revenue in the period in which it is earned; it is not considered earned until a product or service has been provided T-account a graphic representation of a general ledger account in which each account is visually split into left and right sides tangible asset an asset that has physical substance Multiple Choice 1. Which method of accounting must be used by publicly traded companies? a. cash basis b. accrual basis c. a hybrid of cash and accrual basis d. modified accelerated basis 2. Which two accounting principles directly support the accrual method of accounting? a. periodicity, transparency b. historical cost, time period c. conservativism, going concern d. expense recognition, revenue recognition 3. Which of the following account types has a normal debit balance? a. cash b. notes payable c. wages payable d. revenue 4. Sara sells $100 worth of inventory to her client on credit on January 15. She delivers the inventory to the client on January 20. The client pays for the inventory of February 26. On what date should Sara recognize the revenue from the sale? a. January 15 b. January 20 c. January 31 4 • Multiple Choice 125