Figure 4.14 Journal Entry for Silk Screen Machine Depreciation Expense, Year 2 Liam records an annual depreciation expense of $9,600. Each year, the accumulated depreciation balance increases by $9,600, and the machine's book value decreases by the same $9,600. At the end of five years, the asset will have a book value of $10,000, which is calculated by subtracting the accumulated depreciation of from the cost of $58,000. Units-of-Production Depreciation Straight-line depreciation is efficient accounting for assets used consistently over their lifetime, but what about assets that are used with less regularity? The units-of-production depreciation method bases depreciation on the actual usage of the asset, which is more appropriate when an asset's life is a function of usage instead of time. For example, this method could account for depreciation of a silk screen machine for which the depreciable base is $48,000 (as in the straight-line method), but now the number of prints is important. In our example, the machine will have total depreciation of $48,000 over its useful life of 960,000 prints. Therefore, we would divide $48,000 by 960,000 prints to get a cost per print of $0.05. If Liam printed 180,000 items in the first year, the depreciation expense would be . The journal entry to record this expense would be the same as with straight-line depreciation: only the dollar amount would have changed. The presentation of accumulated depreciation and the calculation of the book value would also be the same. Liam would continue to depreciate the asset until a total of $48,000 in depreciation was taken after running 960,000 total prints. THINK IT THROUGH Deciding on a Depreciation Method Liam is struggling to determine which deprecation method they should use for their new silk screen machine. They expect sales to increase over the next five years. They also expect (hope) that in two years they will need to buy a second silk screen machine to keep up with the demand for products of their growing company. Which depreciation method makes more sense for Liam: higher expenses in the first few years or keeping expenses consistent over time? Or would it be better for them to think not in terms of time, but rather in the usage of the machine? Double-Declining-Balance Depreciation The double-declining-balance depreciation method is the most complex of the three methods because it accounts for both time and usage and takes more expense in the first few years of the asset's life. Double declining considers time by determining the percentage of depreciation expense that would exist under straight-line depreciation. To calculate this, divide 100 percent by the estimated life in years. For example, a five-year asset would be 100/5, or 20 percent a year. A four-year asset would be 100/4, or 25 percent a year. Next, because assets are typically more efficient and are used more heavily early in their life span, the double- 118 4 • Accrual Accounting Process Access for free at openstax.org