Figure 4.4 Expanded Accounting Equation As we can see from this expanded accounting equation, Assets accounts increase on the debit side and decrease on the credit side. This is also true of Dividends and Expenses accounts. Liabilities increase on the credit side and decrease on the debit side. This is also true of Common Stock and Revenues accounts. This becomes easier to understand as you become familiar with the normal balance of an account. The balance sheet is a reflection of the accounting equation (see Figure 4.5). It has two sections, assets in one section and liabilities and equity in the other section. It's key to note that both assets and liabilities are broken down on the balance sheet into current and noncurrent classifications in order to provide more detail and transparency. Current assets are those that are consumed within a year. Assets that will be in use longer than a year are considered noncurrent. Current liabilities are those that will be due within a year. Noncurrent liabilities are those that are due more than a year into the future. Figure 4.5 Graphical Representation of the Accounting Equation Both assets and liabilities are categorized as current and noncurrent. Also highlighted are the various activities that affect the equity (or net worth) of the business. Notice each account subcategory (Current Assets and Noncurrent Assets, for example) has an "increase" side and a "decrease" side. As you may recall, these are called T-accounts, and they are used to analyze transactions. The basic components of even the simplest accounting system are accounts and a general ledger. An account is a record showing increases and decreases to assets, liabilities, and equity-the basic components found in the accounting equation. Each of these categories, in turn, includes many individual accounts, all of which a company maintains in its general ledger. A general ledger is a comprehensive listing of all of a company's accounts with their individual balances. 4.3 How Does a Company Recognize a Sale and an Expense? Learning Outcomes By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Explain the revenue recognition principle and how it relates to current and future sales transactions. • Explain the expense recognition principle and how it relates to current and future purchase transactions. • Assess the role of ethics in revenue and expense recognition. You've learned the basics of each method as well as the accounting equation and double-entry accounting. Next, let's turn our attention to when we record transactions, as timing is key. Revenue Recognition Revenue is the value of goods and services the organization sold or provided to customers for a given period of time. In our current example, Chris's landscaping business, the "revenue," or the value of services 4.3 • How Does a Company Recognize a Sale and an Expense? 107