declining method takes usage into account by doubling the straight-line percentage. For a four-year asset, multiply 25 percent , or 50 percent. For a five-year asset, multiply 20 percent , or 40 percent. One unique feature of the double-declining-balance method is that in the first year, the estimated salvage value is not subtracted from the total asset cost before calculating the first year's depreciation expense. Instead, the total cost is multiplied by the calculated percentage. However, depreciation expense is not permitted to take the book value below the estimated salvage value, as demonstrated in Figure 4.15. Figure 4.15 Depreciation Expense, Accumulated Depreciation, and Book Value, Years 1-5 Notice that in year four, the remaining book value of $12,528 was not multiplied by 40 percent. This is because the expense would have been $5,011.20, and since we cannot depreciate the asset below the estimated salvage value of $10,000, the expense cannot exceed $2,528, which is the amount left to depreciate (difference between the book value of $12,528 and the salvage value of $10,000). Since the asset has been depreciated to its salvage value at the end of year four, no depreciation can be taken in year five. In our example, the first year's double-declining-balance depreciation expense would be . For the remaining years, the double-declining percentage is multiplied by the remaining book value of the asset. Liam would continue to depreciate the asset until the book value and the estimated salvage value are the same (in this case, $10,000). The net effect of the differences in straight-line depreciation versus double-declining-balance depreciation is that under the double-declining-balance method, the allowable depreciation expenses are greater in the earlier years than those allowed for straight-line depreciation. However, over the depreciable life of the asset, the total depreciation expense taken will be the same no matter which method the entity chooses. In the current example, both straight-line and double- declining-balance depreciation will provide a total depreciation expense of $48,000 over its five-year depreciable life. LINK TO LEARNING McDonald's Corporation See Form 10-K (https://openstax.org/r/2019-annual-report-pdf) that was filed with the SEC to determine which depreciation method McDonald's Corporation used for its long-term assets in 2019. Hint: Use the search feature to search for key words in an annual report to find information more quickly. For example, search "depreciation." You should find the information you are looking for on page 40 of the annual report. Based on the company's business model and the industry in which it operates, why do you think McDonald's chose this method of depreciating assets? Do you agree with this choice? Why or why not? 4.4 • When Should a Company Capitalize or Expense an Item? 119