credit risk. Lenders want to be rewarded for taking on this risk, so they charge a premium to borrowers who are higher risk. Companies are more likely to go bankrupt and not be able to pay their bills on time than is the US government. So, corporations have to pay a higher interest rate than the US government. If a lender can earn 1% lending to the US government, the lender will only be willing to lend to the riskier corporation if they can earn more than 1%. In Figure 3.18, the interest rates paid by very creditworthy companies is shown. The prime rate is the interest rate that banks charge their very best customers-large companies that are financially very strong and have a very low risk of default. It is generally riskier for a lender to make a loan to an individual than to a corporation. Individuals are more likely to become ill, lose their job, or experience some other financial setback that makes it difficult for them to repay their loans. In Figure 3.18, the interest rate on credit card loans is much higher than the interest rate charged to corporate borrowers. That is because credit card loans are a high risk to the lender. Unlike other loans made to an individual, such as a car loan, the credit card company has no collateral if a consumer cannot pay back the loan. With car loans, if the borrower fails to repay the borrowed money, the lender can repossess the automobile and sell it to recoup some of the money it is owed. If you use a credit card to buy groceries and do not repay the loan, the credit card company cannot repossess the groceries that you purchased. Therefore, credit card loans have notoriously high interest rates to compensate the lender for the high risk. Figure 3.18 Interest Rate on US Treasury Bills and Credit Cards11 This graph shows the rates posted by a majority of top 25 (by assets in domestic offices) insured US-chartered commercial banks. The prime rate is one of several base rates used by banks to price short-term business loans. For further information regarding Treasury constant maturity data, please refer to the Board of Governors and the Treasury. 11 Data from Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US). "Bank Prime Loan Rate (DPRIME)." FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed July 8, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DPRIME; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US). "3-Month Treasury Constant Maturity Rate (DGS3MO)." FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed July 8, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DGS3MO; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US). "Commercial Bank Interest Rate on Credit Card Plans, All Accounts (TERMCBCCALLNS)." FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed July 8, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TERMCBCCALLNS 88 3 • Economic Foundations: Money and Rates Access for free at openstax.org