equipment, bought new equipment, increased its inventory account, and repaid a bond. In which section of the statement of cash flows would each of these items appear? 6. Kokoya's Firm calculates its free cash flow at only $2,000, which the company feels is quite low based on its historical performance and compared to others in its industry. What actions might Kokoya's Firm take to improve its overall cash flow? 7. Complete the common-size income statement for Big Box Outlet using the information below: 8. List at least eight items commonly found in a firm's annual report filed with the SEC. Video Activity The Income Statement Explained Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/income-statement-explain) 1. In the video, you see two years of data for Imaginary Ltd. The company had the same sales and same operating profit in both years. However, its performance really wasn't the same from one year to the next. How do the details of the income statement help you see this? What key performance measures were you able to glean from the income statement? 2. Though the key elements of the income statement can be summarized as simply all the firm's revenues and expenses, how would you describe the elements of the income statement in more detail? Assume you were consulting for a friend who owns a small dairy farm. What items would you expect to see on their income statement? Make a list and be as detailed as you can. Curious if your list is accurate? Consider doing an online search to find an income statement for a dairy farm or similar business. Compare its income statement to your list to see if you had the right idea. How the Balance Sheet Works Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/balance-sheet-works) 3. In the video, before the example started, a fair amount of discussion time was devoted to the accounting equation, double-entry accounting, and the past versus the present data. How do all of these concepts tie together in the balance sheet and the type of data we can hope to glean from a balance sheet? 4. Three key account types are represented on the balance sheet: assets, liabilities, and equity. Much like the income statement, however, there is a great deal more detail to a balance sheet than simply these three 162 5 • Video Activity Access for free at openstax.org