Figure 4.10 Journal Entry for Equipment/Cash CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE Estimating Useful Life and Salvage Value Useful life and salvage value are estimates made at the time an asset is placed in service. It is common and expected that the estimates are inaccurate due to the uncertainty involved in estimating the future. Sometimes, however, a company may attempt to take advantage of estimating salvage value and useful life to improve earnings. A larger salvage value and longer useful life decrease annual depreciation expense and increase annual net income. An example of this behavior is Waste Management, which was disciplined by the SEC in March 2002 for fraudulently altering its estimates to reduce depreciation expense and overstate net income by $1.7 billion.4 Components Used in Calculating Depreciation The expense recognition principle that requires that the cost of the asset be allocated over the asset's useful life is the process of depreciation. For example, if we buy a delivery truck to use for the next five years, we would allocate the cost and record depreciation expense across the entire five-year period. The calculation of the depreciation expense for a period is not based on anticipated changes in the fair-market value of the asset; instead, the depreciation is based on the allocation of the cost of owning the asset over the period of its useful life. The following items are important in determining and recording depreciation: • Book value: the asset's original cost less accumulated depreciation. • Useful life: the length of time the asset will be productively used within operations. • Salvage (residual) value: the price the asset will sell for or be worth as a trade-in when its useful life expires. The determination of salvage value can be an inexact science since it requires anticipating what will occur in the future. Often, the salvage value is estimated based on past experiences with similar assets. • Depreciable base (cost): the depreciation expense over the asset's useful life. For example, if we paid $50,000 for an asset and anticipate a salvage value of $10,000, the depreciable base is $40,000. We expect $40,000 in depreciation over the time period in which the asset was used, and then it would be sold for $10,000. Depreciation records an expense for the value of an asset consumed and removes that portion of the asset from the balance sheet. The journal entry to record depreciation is shown in Figure 4.11. 4 United States Securities and Exchange Commission. "Waste Management, Inc. Founder and Five Other Former Top Officers Sued for Massive Earnings Management Fraud." March 26, 2002. https://www.sec.gov/litigation/litreleases/lr17435.htm 4.4 • When Should a Company Capitalize or Expense an Item? 115