d. February 26 5. How is the book value of a fixed asset calculated? a. original cost less accumulated depreciation b. original cost divided by useful life c. market value less depreciation expense d. depreciable base less market value 6. Which of the following balance sheet item is classified as a fixed asset? a. inventory b. goodwill c. equipment d. accounts receivable 7. What is the formula to determine net income or net loss? a. revenues less expenses b. cash less expenses c. revenues plus cash d. revenues divided by expenses Review Questions 1. Joe runs a small barbershop. Most of his customers pay with cash. He has only a few monthly expenses including wages for one employee and utilities. Which method of accounting should Joe use? 2. Which method of accounting generally provides the most accurate information on organizational performance (income or loss)? 3. Under the accrual basis of accounting, when is an expense recorded? 4. Describe the basic elements of a T-account. 5. What is double-entry accounting? 6. What is the expense recognition principle? 7. Why is ethics an important concept pertaining to revenue and expense recognition principles? 8. What is the revenue recognition principle? 9. What is the difference between a tangible and an intangible fixed asset? List common examples of each. 10. How is the cost of a fixed asset recorded and recognized over time? Problems 1. Padma's Pools Inc. paid $500 for office supplies. What was the impact of this transaction on Padma's cash flow? 2. Sally's BigBox Store issued 1,000 shares of common stock with par value of $10 each and market value of $16 each in exchange for a new building. What was the impact of this transaction on Sally's cash flow? 3. Jose sells $500 worth of merchandise to a client on June 1. He delivers the product and invoices the customer on June 10. The customer pays Jose on July 9. What is Jose's revenue for June and July, respectively, under the cash and accrual methods of accounting? 126 4 • Review Questions Access for free at openstax.org