September rather than in August. In this case, the ending balance in Chris's checking account would be $1,250, a result of earning $1,400 and only spending $100 for the brakes on the tractor and $50 for fuel. This stream of cash flows is an example of cash-basis accounting because it reflects when payments are received and made, not necessarily the time period that they affect. At the end of this section, you will address accrual accounting, which does reflect the time period that payments affect. The Accounting Equation It may be helpful to think of the accounting equation from a "sources and claims" perspective. Under this approach, the assets (items owned by the organization) were obtained by incurring liabilities or were provided by owners. Stated differently, every asset has a claim against it-by creditors and/or owners. You may recall from mathematics courses that an equation must always be in balance. Therefore, we must ensure that the two sides of the accounting equation are always equal. We will explore the components of the accounting equation in more detail shortly. First, we need to examine several underlying concepts that form the foundation for the accounting equation: the double-entry accounting system, debits and credits, and the "normal" balance for each account that is part of a formal accounting system. THINK IT THROUGH The Accounting Equation On a sheet of paper, use three columns to create your own accounting equation. In the first column, list all the things you own (assets). List only the asset itself; don't worry about any associated liabilities (expenses) in that column. In the second column, list any amounts owed (the liabilities). When you are done, total up all the assets. Then total up all the liabilities. Now, use the accounting equation to calculate the net amount of the asset (equity). To do so, subtract the total assets from the total liabilities. This figure makes the accounting equation balance and represents equity, or an estimate of your net worth. Here is something else to consider: Is it possible to have negative equity? It sure is . . . ask any college student who has taken out loans. At first glance there is no asset directly associated with the amount of the loan. But is that, in fact, the case? You might ask yourself why you should make an investment in a college education-what is the benefit (asset) to going to college? The answer lies in the difference in lifetime earnings with a college degree versus without a college degree. This is influenced by many things, including the supply and demand of jobs and employees. It is also influenced by the earnings for the type of college degree pursued. Solution: Answers will vary but may include vehicles, clothing, electronics (include cell phones and computer/gaming systems), and sports equipment. They may also include money owed on these assets, most likely vehicles and perhaps cell phones. In the case of a student loan, there may be a liability with no corresponding asset (yet). Responses should be able to evaluate the benefit of investing in college and the wage differential between earnings with and without a college degree. Let's continue our exploration of the accounting equation, focusing on the equity component in particular. Recall that we defined equity as the net worth of an organization. It is helpful to also think of net worth as the accounting value of the organization. Recall, too, that revenues (inflows as a result of providing goods and services) increase the accounting value of the organization. So every dollar of revenue an organization generates increases the overall value of the organization. 4.2 • Economic Basis for Accrual Accounting 105