Price/Earnings (P/E) Ratio The price/earnings (P/E) ratio measures the current market share price of a company's stock relative to its earnings per share (EPS). The ratio is helpful in comparing performance and stock price of a company to other companies. It's also helpful in evaluating how much investors are willing to pay for earnings performance. Investors, in particular, use this ratio and rely on two key characteristics: past performance (trailing) and future estimates (forward). Trailing data can be calculated but is also easily found online, as it's a common measure reported on financial sites. Investors will often look for P/E TTM, which is the price/earnings ratio for the trailing 12 months (last year worth of earnings data). This helps investors assess one day's stock price relative to the earnings per share over the past 12 months. P/E ratio is widely used by investors to determine if a stock is over- or undervalued. It also helps them compare one firm to that of the industry average or index, such as the S&P 500. In the prior section we saw earnings per share data for Clear Lake Sporting Goods. Using its current year earnings per share of $3.75 and the current stock price of $69.41, we can calculate price/earnings ratio for Clear Lake Sporting Goods: An 18.51 ratio means an investor would expect to invest $18.51 to gain $1 of earnings. Book Value per Share Book value per share is often used hand in hand with market value per share. Investors compare the two in order to see if the stock is possibly over- or undervalued. Book value is derived from accounting practices and shows the value of the firm on paper. Market value, on the other hand, is determined by supply and demand, based on what investors are willing to pay for the stock. If the market value per share is higher than the book value, the stock is considered overvalued. If the market value is lower than the book value, it's considered undervalued. In theory, book value per share represents the total value common shareholders would receive if the firm were liquidated. It is total equity less preferred equity, spread across the total shares outstanding. The formula to calculate book value per share is The book value per share for Clear Lake Sporting Goods is If investors compared the book value per share of $10.00 for Clear Lake Sporting Goods to the P/E ratio of $18.51, they would likely conclude that the stock was undervalued in the year of analysis. LINK TO LEARNING Book Value versus Market Value of Shares This video about book value and market value (https://openstax.org/r/video-about-book-value) explains the basic concepts and discusses how the two differ. Samples of the concept are then explored using Apple Inc. as an example. 6.5 • Market Value Ratios 181