6.3 Liquidity Ratios By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Calculate current, quick, and cash ratios to assess a firm's liquidity and make informed business decisions. • Assess organizational performance using liquidity ratios. Liquidity refers to the business's ability to manage current assets or convert assets into cash in order to meet short-term cash needs, another aspect of a firm's financial health. Examples of the most liquid assets include cash, accounts receivable, and inventory for merchandising or manufacturing businesses. The reason these are among the most liquid assets is that these assets will be turned into cash more quickly than land or buildings, for example. Accounts receivable represents goods or services that have already been sold and will typically be paid/collected within 30 to 45 days. Inventory is less liquid than accounts receivable because the product must first be sold before it generates cash (either through a cash sale or sale on account). Inventory is, however, more liquid than land or buildings because, under most circumstances, it is easier and quicker for a business to find someone to purchase its goods than it is to find a buyer for land or buildings. Current Ratio The current ratio is closely related to working capital; it represents the current assets divided by current liabilities. The current ratio utilizes the same amounts as working capital (current assets and current liabilities) but presents the amount in ratio, rather than dollar, form. That is, the current ratio is defined as current assets/current liabilities. The interpretation of the current ratio is similar to working capital. A ratio of greater than one indicates that the firm has the ability to meet short-term obligations with a buffer, while a ratio of less than one indicates that the firm should pay close attention to the composition of its current assets as well as the timing of the current liabilities. The current ratio in the current year for Clear Lake Sporting Goods is A 2:1 ratio means the company has twice as many current assets as current liabilities; typically, this would be plenty to cover obligations. A 2:1 ratio is actually quite high for most companies and most industries. Again, it's recommended that ratios be used in conjunction with one another. An analyst would likely look at the high current ratio and low accounts receivable turnover to begin asking questions about management performance, as this might indicate a trouble area (high inventory and slow collections). LINK TO LEARNING Target Corporation As we have learned, the current ratio shows how well a company can cover short-term liabilities with short- term assets. Look through the balance sheet in the 2019 Annual Report for Target (https://openstax.org/r/ annual-report-for-target) and calculate the current ratio. What does the outcome mean for Target? Quick Ratio The quick ratio, also known as the acid-test ratio, is similar to the current ratio except current assets are more narrowly defined as the most liquid assets, which exclude inventory and prepaid expenses. The conversion of 172 6 • Measures of Financial Health Access for free at openstax.org