reflects how profitable the firm's daily operations were as a whole. This still does not include other miscellaneous items outside the scope of a firm's normal business. Just as the name implies, it shows income from the core operations of the firm. Figure 5.3 Income Statement through Income from Operations We can see that the company was able to generate more in net sales in the current year than the prior year. However, it only generated in gross profit and of additional operating income. Further investigation shows that while net sales increased, so did the direct costs of its goods (COGS) and its operating expenses. We will further explore how to assess each of these expenses later in the chapter using common-size analysis. Common-size analysis reflects each element of a financial statement as a percentage of the base. In the case of the income statement, the base is net sales. Here we would see that COGS was 50 percent of net sales in both the current and prior year , indicating there wasn't any significant change in performance we could detect from the information provided in the income statement. LINK TO LEARNING Operating Expenses Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and locate the company's income statement (the income statement begins on page 31). Review Apple's operating income for the last few years. Has it improved or declined? Does this fall in line with your expectations based on your previous review of the company's net sales and gross profit? Based on the improvement or decline in operating income, review Apple's operating expenses to investigate. Have any of the operating expenses changed significantly? How did that impact the company's operating income? What might it tell you about the company's performance? Net Income Finally, we move on to net income, or what is commonly referred to as the bottom line. Net income (or loss) reflects the net impact of all financial transactions for the firm, including those that are caused by events outside the normal course of business. The most common items deducted from operating income to arrive at net income include interest expense, gains/losses, and income tax expense. Remember, gains and losses are those that result from unusual transactions outside the normal course of business. Examples include selling a piece of old equipment or a loss on retiring debt. We can see in Figure 5.4 that Clear Lake Sporting Goods has outstanding debt, so it incurred interest expense 132 5 • Financial Statements Access for free at openstax.org