CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE Ethics in Revenue Recognition Because each industry typically has a different method for recognizing income, revenue recognition is one of the most difficult tasks for accountants, as it involves a number of ethical dilemmas related to income reporting. To provide an industry-wide approach, Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-09 and other related updates were implemented to clarify revenue recognition rules. The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) announced that these updates would replace US GAAP's current industry- specific revenue recognition practices with a principle-based approach, potentially affecting both day-to- day business accounting and the execution of business contracts with customers.1 The AICPA and the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) require professional accountants to act with due care and to remain abreast of new accounting rules and methods of accounting for different transactions, including revenue recognition. The IFAC emphasizes the role of professional accountants working within a business in ensuring the quality of financial reporting: "Management is responsible for the financial information produced by the company. As such, professional accountants in businesses therefore have the task of defending the quality of financial reporting right at the source where the numbers and figures are produced!"2 In accordance with proper revenue recognition, accountants do not recognize revenue before it is earned. CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE Gift Card Revenue Recognition Gift cards have become an essential part of revenue generation and growth for many businesses. Although they are practical for consumers and are a low cost for businesses, navigating revenue recognition guidelines can be difficult. Gift cards with expiration dates require that revenue recognition be delayed until customer use or expiration. However, most gift cards now have no expiration date. So when do you recognize revenue? Companies may need to provide an estimation of projected (or deferred) gift card revenue and usage during a period based on past experience or industry standards. There are a few rules governing reporting. If a company determines that a portion of all the issued gift cards will never be used, it may write this off to income. In some states, if a gift card remains unused, in part or in full, the unused portion of the card is transferred to the state government. It is considered unclaimed property for the customer, meaning that the company cannot keep these funds as revenue because, in this case, they have reverted to the state government. Expense Recognition An expense is a cost associated with providing goods or services to customers. In our opening example, the expenses that Chris incurred totaled $1,150 (consisting of $100 for brakes, $50 for fuel, and $1,000 for insurance). You might think of expenses as the opposite of revenue, in that expenses reduce Chris's checking account balance. Likewise, expenses decrease the value of the business and represent the dollar value of costs incurred to provide goods and services to customers for a given period of time. 1 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). "Revenue Recognition." n.d. https://www.aicpa.org/interestareas/frc/ accountingfinancialreporting/revenuerecognition.html 2 Len Jui and Jessie Wong. "Roles and Importance of Professional Accountants in Business." China Accounting Journal. October 21, 2013. https://www.ifac.org/news-events/2013-10/roles-and-importance-professional-accountants-business 110 4 • Accrual Accounting Process Access for free at openstax.org