The equity multiplier measures leverage. It is computed as shown: Using DuPont analysis, investors can see overall performance broken down into smaller pieces, which helps them better understand what is driving ROE. We already have the computations for Clear Lake Sporting Goods' profit margin and total asset turnover: We can calculate the equity multiplier using the equity multiplier equation and prior calculations for Clear Lake's average total assets and average stockholder equity: Now that we have all three elements, we can complete the DuPont analysis for Clear Lake Sporting Goods: LINK TO LEARNING The DuPont Method This video about the DuPont method (https://openstax.org/r/video-about-DuPont-method) walks through its history, discusses its basic components, and shows how to calculate and interpret each measurement. Performance Analysis ROE captures the nuances of all three elements. A good sales margin and a proper asset turnover are both needed for a successful operation. Like all ratios, assessing performance is relative. It's important to look at the ratio in context of the organization, its history, and the industry. If we compare Clear Lake's ROE of 26.4% to the recreational products industry average of 12.56% for the same year, it would appear as though Clear Lake Sporting Goods is outperforming the general industry. However, recreational products can include a wide variety of businesses beyond just the outdoor gear in which Clear Lake Sporting Goods specializes. An analyst could look at other key competitors such as Cabela's or Bass Pro Shops to get even more relevant comparisons. Clear Lake Sporting Goods is also technically a retail store, albeit a specialized one. An analyst might also consider the industry averages for general or online retail of 20.64% and 27.05%, respectively. Compared to the broader retail industry, Clear Lake Sporting Goods is still performing well, but its performance is not as 184 6 • Measures of Financial Health Access for free at openstax.org