Likewise, expenses (outflows as a result of generating revenue) decrease the value of the organization. So each dollar of expenses an organization incurs decreases the overall value of the organization. The same approach can be taken with the other elements of the financial statements: • Gains increase the value (equity) of the organization. • Losses decrease the value (equity) of the organization. • Investments by owners increase the value (equity) of the organization. • Distributions to owners decrease the value (equity) of the organization. • Changes in assets and liabilities can either increase or decrease the value (equity) of the organization depending on the net result of the transaction. Let's look at Chris's Landscaping business again and do the same quick exercise you did with your personal finances. If we were to total all of Chris's assets, we would find just one: $250 in cash. She's using the family's tractor, but she doesn't own the tractor, so it is not her asset. Her liabilities are currently $0, as she paid cash for all the expenses she incurred already. If we total her assets, we get $250. Liabilities total $0. Using the accounting equation, we find her equity to currently be $250, or Double-Entry Accounting Accounting is based on a double-entry accounting system, which requires the following: • Each time we record a transaction, we must record a change in at least two different accounts. Having two or more accounts change will allow us to keep the accounting equation in balance. • Not only will at least two accounts change, but there must also be at least one debit and one credit side impacted. • The sum of the debits must equal the sum of the credits for each transaction. In order for companies to record the myriad of transactions they have each year, there is a need for a simple but detailed system. Journals are useful tools to meet this need. Debits and Credits Each account can be represented visually by splitting the account into left and right sides as shown. The graphic representation of a general ledger account is known as a T-account. It is called this because it looks like a "T," as you can see with the T-account shown in Figure 4.3. Figure 4.3 T-Account A debit records financial information on the left side of each account. A credit records financial information on the right side of an account. One side of each account will increase, and the other side will decrease. The ending account balance is found by calculating the difference between debits and credits for each account. You will often see the terms debit and credit represented in shorthand, written as DR or dr and CR or cr, respectively. Depending on the account type, the sides that increase and decrease may vary. We can illustrate each account type and its corresponding debit and credit effects in the form of an expanded equation (see Figure 4.4). 106 4 • Accrual Accounting Process Access for free at openstax.org