LINK TO LEARNING Return on Assets This video explains how to calculate return on assets (https://openstax.org/r/video-explains-how-to- calculate) and how to interpret the results. The video provides the formula, a discussion of the concept, and the importance of the ratio. Return on Equity Return on equity measures the company's ability to use its invested capital to generate income. The invested capital comes from stockholders' investments in the company's stock and its retained earnings and is leveraged to create profit. The higher the return, the better the company is doing at using its investments to yield a profit. The formula for return on equity is Average stockholders' equity is found by dividing the sum of beginning and ending stockholders' equity balances found on the balance sheet. The beginning stockholders' equity balance in the current year is taken from the ending stockholders' equity balance in the prior year. Keep in mind that the net income is calculated after preferred dividends have been paid. For Clear Lake Sporting Goods, we will use the net income figure and deduct the preferred dividends that have been paid. The return on equity for the current year is The higher the figure, the better the company is using its investments to create a profit. Industry standards can dictate what an acceptable return is. The DuPont Method ROE in its basic form is useful; however, there are really three components of ROE: operating efficiency (profit margin), asset usage (total asset turnover), and leverage (equity ratio). This is known as the DuPont method. It originated in 1919 when the DuPont company implemented it for internal measurement purposes.2 The DuPont method can be expressed using this formula: Profit margin indicates how much profit is generated by each dollar of sales and is computed as shown: Total asset turnover indicates the number of sales dollars produced by every dollar invested in capital assets-in other words, how efficiently the company is using its capital assets to generate sales. It is computed as shown: 2 Joshua Kennon. "What Is the DuPont Method Return on Equity, or ROE, Formula?" The Balance. December 16, 2020. https://thebalance.com/the-dupont-model-return-on-equity-formula-for-beginners-357494 6.6 • Profitability Ratios and the DuPont Method 183