LINK TO LEARNING Target Corporation As we have learned, the debt-to-assets ratio shows the relationship between a firm's debt and assets. Look through the financial statements in the 2019 Annual Report for Target (https://openstax.org/r/annual- report-for-target) and calculate the debt-to-assets ratio. What does the outcome mean for Target? Debt-to-Equity Ratio The debt-to-equity ratio shows the relationship between debt and equity as it relates to business financing. A company can take out loans, issue stock, and retain earnings to be used in future periods to keep operations running. A key difference in debt and equity is the interest expense repayment that a loan carries as opposed to equity, which does not have this requirement. Therefore, a company wants to know how much debt and equity contribute to its financing. The formula for the debt-to-equity ratio is The information needed to compute the debt-to-equity ratio for Clear Lake Sporting Goods in the current year can be found on the balance sheet. This means that for every one dollar of equity contributed toward financing, $1.50 is contributed from lenders. Recall that total assets equal total liabilities plus total equity. Both the debt-to-assets and debt-to-equity ratio have total liabilities in the numerator. The difference in the two ratios is the denominator. The denominator for the debt-to-equity ratio is total stockholder equity. The denominator for the debt-to-assets ratio is total assets, or total liabilities plus total equity. Thus, the two ratios contain the same information, making calculating both ratios redundant. A financial analyst may prefer to calculate one ratio over the other because of the format of readily available industry data to use for comparison purposes or for consistency with other calculations the analyst is performing. THINK IT THROUGH Financing a Business Expansion You are the CFO of a small corporation. The president, who is one of five shareholders, has created an innovative new product that is testing well with substantial demand. To begin manufacturing, $400,000 is needed to acquire the equipment. The corporation's balance sheet shows total assets of $2,400,000 and total liabilities of $600,000. Most of the liabilities relate to debt that carries a covenant requiring that the company maintain a debt-to-equity ratio not exceeding 0.50. Determine the effect that each of the two options of obtaining additional capital will have on the debt covenant. Solution: We know the total liabilities for the firm to be $600,000. Using the accounting equation, we can find that the firm has $1,800,000 in equity. current debt-to-equity ratio of 0.33, which is well below the requirement for the debt covenant. If the firm issues debt, the ratio changes to , which is 0.55 and would violate the debt covenant. If the firm chooses to issue additional stock, the new debt-to-equity ratio would be , which is 0.27. This is well below the requirements in the debt covenant. 6.4 • Solvency Ratios 175