CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE Alibaba Group Earnings Announcements Continue to Exceed Market Expectations Alibaba, a Chinese-based company traded in the United States, exceeded market expectations in 2020 quarterly earnings releases. In the November 2020 earnings release, Alibaba reported earnings per share of 17.97 yuan versus market estimates of 14.33. Despite many companies struggling due to the pandemic, Alibaba reported strong earnings as a result of the surge in online shopping and remote work. (sources: "Alibaba Beats Estimates as Pandemic Fuels Online, Cloud Computing Demand." CNBC. August 20, 2020. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/08/20/alibaba-beats-quarterly-revenue-estimates.html; Emily Bary. "Alibaba Earnings Top Expectations as Pandemic Drives Increased Digital Purchases. Market Watch. August 20, 2020. https://www.marketwatch.com/story/alibaba-earnings-top-expectations-as-pandemic-drives- increased-digital-purchases-2020-08-20; Matthew Johnston. "Alibaba Earnings: What Happened." Investopedia. November 5, 2020. https://www.investopedia.com/alibaba-q2-2021-earnings-5085444; Chris Versace. "Why S&P 500 EPS Expectations Showcase the Need for Thematic Investing." Tematica Research. June 3, 2020. https://www.tematicaresearch.com/why-sp-500-eps-expectations-showcase-the-need-for- thematic-investing) Calculating Earnings per Share Earnings per share is the profit a company earns for each of its outstanding common shares. Both the balance sheet and income statement are needed to calculate earnings per share. The balance sheet provides details on the preferred dividend rate, the total par value of the preferred stock, and the number of common shares outstanding. The income statement indicates the net income for the period. The formula to calculate basic earnings per share is By removing the preferred dividends from net income, the numerator represents the profit available to common shareholders. Because preferred dividends represent the amount of net income to be distributed to preferred shareholders, this portion of the income is obviously not available for common shareholders. While a number of variations of measuring a company's profit, such as NOPAT (net operating profit after taxes) and EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization), are used in the financial world, GAAP requires companies to calculate earnings per share based on a corporation's net income, as this amount appears directly on a company's income statement, which for public companies must be audited. In the denominator, only common shares are used to determine earnings per share because earnings per share is a measure of earnings for each common share of stock. The denominator can fluctuate throughout the year as a company issues and buys back shares of its own stock. The weighted average number of shares is used on the denominator because of this fluctuation. To illustrate, assume that a corporation began the year with 600 shares of common stock outstanding and then on April 1 issued 1,000 more shares. During the period January 1 to March 31, the company had the original 600 shares outstanding. Once the new shares were issued, the company had the original 600 plus the new 1,000 shares, for a total of 1,600 shares for each of the next nine months-from April 1 to December 31. To determine the weighted average shares, apply these fractional weights to both of the stock amounts (see Figure 6.6). 6.5 • Market Value Ratios 177