CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE Ethical Considerations: How WorldCom's Improper Capitalization of Costs Almost Shut Down the Internet In 2002, telecommunications giant WorldCom filed for the largest Chapter 11 bankruptcy to date, a situation resulting from manipulation of its accounting records.8 At the time, WorldCom operated nearly a third of the bandwidth of the 20 largest US internet backbone routes, connecting over 3,400 global networks that serviced more than 70,000 businesses in 114 countries.9 WorldCom used a number of accounting gimmicks to defraud investors, mainly including capitalizing costs that should have been expensed. Under normal circumstances, this might have been considered just another accounting fiasco leading to the end of a company. However, WorldCom controlled a large percentage of backbone routes, a major component of the hardware supporting the internet, as even the Securities and Exchange Commission recognized. If such an event were to happen today, it could shut down international commerce and would be considered a national emergency.10 As demonstrated by WorldCom, the unethical behavior of a few accountants could have shut down the world's online businesses and international commerce. An accountant's job is fundamental and important: keep businesses operating in a transparent fashion. (Sources: "WorldCom (UNNET)." Cybertelecom. n.d. http://www.cybertelecom.org/industry/wcom.htm; Dennis R. Beresford, Nicholas DeB. Katzenbach, and C. B. Rogers, Jr. "Report of the Special Investigative Committee of the Board of Directors of WorldCom, Inc." US Securities and Exchange Commission. March 31, 2003. https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/723527/000093176303001862/dex991.htm) 4.5 What Is "Profit" versus "Loss" for the Company? Learning Outcomes By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Outline the components necessary to calculate profit or loss. • Contrast revenue and gains versus expenses and losses. • Differentiate revenue and expense versus receipt or payment of cash. It's a common misconception that if a business has cash they are making a profit, and if they are suffering a loss they must not have any cash. While this could be true, it's not necessarily true. In this section you'll explore key differences between cash flow, revenue, expense, profits, and losses. Calculating Profit and Loss Net income (net loss) is determined by comparing revenues and expenses. Net income is a result of revenues (inflows) being greater than expenses (outflows). A net loss occurs when expenses (outflows) are greater than revenues (inflows). In accounting it is common to present net income in the following format: Recall that revenue is the value of goods and services a business provides to its customers and increases the value of the business. Expenses, on the other hand, are the costs of providing the goods and services and decrease the value of the business. When revenues exceed expenses, companies have net income. This means the business has been successful at earning revenues, containing expenses, or a combination of both. If, on the other hand, expenses exceed revenues, companies experience a net loss. This means the business was 7 Ibid. 8 Luisa Beltran. "WorldCom Files Largest Bankruptcy Ever." CNN Money. July 22, 2002. https://money.cnn.com/2002/07/19/news/ worldcom_bankruptcy/ 9 Jeff Keefe. Monopoly.com: Will the WorldCom-MCI Merger Tangle the Web? Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute, 1998. https://www.epi.org/publication/monopoly-will-the-worldcom-mci-merger-tangle-the-web/ 10 Dan Schiller. Bad Deal of the Century: The Worrisome Implications of the WorldCom-MCI Merger. Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute, 1998. https://www.epi.org/publication/studies_baddealfull/ 4.5 • What Is "Profit" versus "Loss" for the Company? 121