Currency prices are determined in the marketplace through the same types of supply-and-demand forces we discussed earlier in this chapter. What would cause the peso to appreciate? Either an increase in the demand for pesos or a decrease in the supply of pesos. Currency Depreciation Just as a currency can appreciate, it can depreciate. If the quote at the bank was , it would only cost $0.0500 to purchase a Mexican peso. When it costs fewer dollars to purchase a peso, the peso has depreciated. Either a decrease in demand for pesos or an increase in supply of pesos will cause the peso to depreciate. Because an exchange rate is the price of one currency expressed in terms of another currency, if one of the currencies depreciates, the other currency must, by definition, appreciate. If it costs $0.0500 to purchase a Mexican peso, the price of a US dollar, in terms of a Mexican peso would be calculated as So, the price of one US dollar would be 20 Mexican pesos. Exchange Rate Risk Businesses that engage in international business face currency exchange rate risk. As exchange rates change, a business can be impacted in a number of ways. One of these risks, transaction exposure, is the risk that the value of a business's expected receipts or expenses will change as a result of a change in currency exchange rates. A pottery-making business that has sold merchandise to a company in the United States for $20,000, for example, will need to exchange the $20,000 for pesos to be able to pay its workers and other expenses in pesos. How many pesos it will receive for $20,000 will change depending on the exchange rate. If the exchange rate is , the company will receive 320,000 pesos for the $20,000. If the exchange rate is , the company will receive 400,000 pesos for the $20,000. Thus, as the peso depreciates (and the US dollar appreciates), the same number of dollars will provide more pesos. Conversely, as the peso appreciates (and the US dollar depreciates), the same number of dollars will provide fewer pesos. Firms that hold assets in a foreign country also face translation exposure. When a company creates its financial statements, items are reported using one currency. As foreign exchange rates change, the value of how items are reported on these financial statements can change. This type of risk is an accounting risk. Economic exposure is the risk that a change in exchange rates will impact a business's number of customers and sales. For example, tourists have the option of spending a week-long vacation at a resort in the United States or in Mexico. As the dollar appreciates, US citizens can exchange their dollars for more pesos, resulting in their purchasing power going further at a Mexican resort. Because an appreciating dollar also means a depreciating peso, it would mean that Mexicans who earn pesos will receive fewer dollars when they exchange their pesos. A Mexican who wants to stay at a $200-per-night hotel in Colorado will need more pesos to pay for the room when the peso depreciates. The depreciating peso will likely mean that more Mexicans will spend their vacation week in Mexico, and fewer will vacation in the United States. Even businesses that do not view themselves as involved in international business can face economic exposure. The ski lodge in Colorado will find that its customers from Mexico decrease when the dollar appreciates. Likewise, when the dollar appreciates, some of the ski lodge's US-based customers may choose instead to visit a resort in Mexico, where their purchasing power is strong. 90 3 • Economic Foundations: Money and Rates Access for free at openstax.org