statements, various required disclosures pertaining to accounting policies, the management discussion and analysis (MD&A) statement, a letter from the CEO to the shareholders, and the firm's audit report. THINK IT THROUGH Annual Report Key Elements Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and review the title of the table of contents on page 1. What key elements would you be drawn to review if you were a potential investor? In Part II of the table of contents, find the MD&A report (page 20) and use the table of contents link to navigate to it. What key highlights and challenges did the company report for the year? Solution: Answers may vary. A few key items of note might include risk factors, financial statements, the MD&A letter, and disclosures about market risk. Apple's MD&A reported significant updates on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, a few financial updates, product updates, segment performance data, a conversation about its debt, contractual obligations, and accounting policies. SEC Reporting Requirements The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requires publicly traded firms to regularly provide several reports. The two most common are the 10-K and quarterly report (10-Q). Certain unique events also require an additional filing called an 8-K. There are many events that might require reporting. A few key examples include changes to rights of shareholders, changes in control of the company, and amendments to the company charter or bylaws. The quarterly report is much like the annual report already discussed. It contains the firm's financial statements, required accounting disclosures, statements on internal control, and a management discussion and analysis (MD&A) letter. It does not contain an auditor's report, as firms are not audited on a quarterly basis. Quarterly reports are helpful to investors because they provide information on a timely enough basis to be relevant. LINK TO LEARNING Investor Relations Visit the Apple, Inc. Investor Relations page, SEC Filings section (https://openstax.org/r/sec-filings). Notice how many different reports Apple files regularly with the SEC. Locate the most recent quarterly (10-Q) and annual reports (10-K) and scan the table of contents. How does the quarterly report differ from the annual report? Do you notice key items in the annual report not provided in the quarterly report? 5.8 • Reporting Financial Activity 157