following line provides information on any events during the period that changed the value of any of the accounts. Common examples of events found on the statement include net income or loss for the period, issuing common or preferred stock, purchasing or selling treasury stock, and declaring a dividend. Clear Lake Sporting Goods has just common stock and retained earnings to report in their statement of owner's equity. They had just two events to report in their statement that impacted their equity accounts; they reported net income and they issued dividends (see Figure 5.14). Figure 5.14 Statement of Stockholder Equity for Clear Lake Sporting Goods LINK TO LEARNING Cash Flows Khan Academy (https://openstax.org/l/50CashFlowsVid) explains cash flows in a unique way. 5.5 The Statement of Cash Flows Learning Outcomes By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Outline the purpose and importance of the statement of cash flows. • Identify the structure and key elements of the statement of cash flows. The final financial statement is the statement of cash flows. It is a crucial statement, as it shows the sources of and uses of cash for the firm during the accounting period. Remember, under accrual accounting, transactions are recorded when they occur, not necessarily when cash moves. Thus, the income statement does not provide all the insights necessary to understand a firm's cash flows. To fully understand the firm's flow of cash, the statement of cash flows is needed. Importance of the Statement of Cash Flows Remember, most firms use accrual accounting. Revenues and expenses are recorded when they occur, not necessarily when cash moves. This can create timing differences between profits and cash flows. A firm can be profitable and still not have an adequate flow of cash. The opposite is also true: it can experience a net loss and still have cash on hand. Earning a profit is wonderful, but it is not the only goal an organization has. It must also have adequate cash flow to support daily operations. To support cash planning and to provide external financial statement users such as lenders and investors information about the firm's cash flow, the statement of cash flows is prepared. Cash flow is also a crucial metric for determining the value of a company. External financial statement users also rely on the statement of cash flows to help them evaluate the quality of the firm's earnings. Users compare earnings to cash flow to assess the validity of the earnings data. For example, a firm reporting a strong profit but very little cash flow might raise some questions as to what was recorded to drive profits that isn't also driving cash flows. The statement of cash flows also helps external users determine the driving forces behind the firm's cash flows. They can see if cash is generated primarily by daily operations or if cash is being generated or 5.5 • The Statement of Cash Flows 143