THINK IT THROUGH Coffee Shop Expenses While thinking about or visiting a coffee shop in your area, look around (or visualize) and identify items or activities that are the expenses of the coffee shop. Remember, expenses for the coffee shop are related to resources consumed while generating revenue from selling coffee and related items. Do not forget about any expenses that might not be so obvious-as a general rule, every activity in a business has an associated cost. Solution: Costs of the coffee shop that might be readily observed would include rent, wages for the employees, and the cost of the coffee, pastries, and other items/merchandise that may be sold. In addition, costs such as utilities, equipment, and cleaning or other supplies might also be readily observable. More obscure costs of the coffee shop would include insurance, regulatory costs such as health department licensing, point-of- sale/credit card costs, advertising, donations, and payroll costs such as workers' compensation, unemployment, and so on. There are also unseen costs, such as aging of the building (if owned by the coffee shop) and wear and tear or aging of the equipment. 4.4 When Should a Company Capitalize or Expense an Item? Learning Outcomes By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Define the key characteristics of a fixed asset. • Explain how the cost of a fixed asset is spread throughout its useful life via depreciation. • Assess the impact to net income of expensing versus capitalizing an item. Assets are items a business owns. For accounting purposes, assets are categorized as current versus long term and tangible versus intangible. Any asset that is expected to be used by the business for more than one year is considered a long-term asset. These assets are not intended for resale and are anticipated to help generate revenue for the business in the future. Some common long-term assets are computers and other office machines, buildings, vehicles, software, computer code, and copyrights. Although these are all considered long-term assets, some are tangible and some are intangible. To better understand the nature of fixed assets, let's get to know Liam and their new business. Liam is excited to be graduating from their MBA program and looks forward to having more time to pursue their business venture. During one of their courses, Liam came up with the business idea of creating trendy workout attire. For their class project, they started silk-screening vintage album cover designs onto tanks, tees, and yoga pants. They tested the market by selling their wares on campus and were surprised how quickly and how often they sold out. In fact, sales were high enough that they decided to go into business for themselves. One of their first decisions involved whether they should continue to pay someone else to silk-screen their designs or do their own silk-screening. To do their own silk-screening, they would need to invest in a silk screen machine. Liam will need to analyze the purchase of a silk screen machine to determine the impact on their business in the short term as well as the long term, including the accounting implications related to the expense of this machine. Liam knows that over time, the value of the machine will decrease, but they also know that an asset is supposed to be recorded on the books at its historical cost. They also wonder what costs are considered part of this asset. Additionally, Liam has learned about the matching principle (expense recognition) but needs to learn how that relates to a machine that is purchased in one year and used for many years to help generate revenue. Liam has a lot of information to consider before making this decision. 4.4 • When Should a Company Capitalize or Expense an Item? 111