Times Interest Earned (TIE) Ratio The times interest earned (TIE) ratio measures the company's ability to pay interest expense on all debt incurred. This ability to pay is determined by the available earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) are deducted. These earnings are considered the operating income. Lenders will pay attention to this ratio before extending credit. The more times over a company can cover interest, the more likely a lender will extend long- term credit. The formula for times interest earned is The information needed to compute times interest earned for Clear Lake Sporting Goods in the current year can be found on the income statement. The $43,000 is the operating income, representing earnings before interest and taxes. The 21.5 times outcome suggests that Clear Lake Sporting Goods can easily repay interest on an outstanding loan and creditors would have little risk that Clear Lake Sporting Goods would be unable to pay. LINK TO LEARNING Times Interest Earned This video about times interest earned (https://openstax.org/r/video-about-times) explains how to calculate it and why the ratio is useful, and it provides an example. 6.5 Market Value Ratios By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Calculate earnings per share to determine the portion of profit allocated to each outstanding share of common stock. • Evaluate firm value using the price/earnings ratio and book value per share. In this section we will turn our attention to market value ratios, measures used to assess a firm's overall market price. Common ratios used include earnings per share, the price/earnings ratio, and book value per share. Earnings per Share (EPS) Earnings per share (EPS) measures the portion of a corporation's profit allocated to each outstanding share of common stock. An increasing earnings per share can drive up a stock price. Conversely, falling earnings per share can lower a stock's market price. Earnings per share is also a component in calculating the price-to- earnings ratio (the market price of the stock divided by its earnings per share), which many investors find to be a key indicator of the value of a company's stock. It's key to note, however, that EPS, like any ratio, should be used with caution and in tandem with other ratios and contextual data. Many financial professionals choose not to rely on income statement data and, similarly, EPS because they feel the cash flow statement provides more reliable and insightful information. 176 6 • Measures of Financial Health Access for free at openstax.org