3.6 Sources and Characteristics of Economic Data Learning Outcomes By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Interpret economic data. • Compute the percent change for economic variables. FRED: Federal Reserve Economic Data One of the largest sources of economic data is the Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED) database.12 This database is maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and contains more than 765,000 economic time series. These time series are compiled by the Federal Reserve and come from a number of sources, including the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the US Census. LINK TO LEARNING FRED Data included in the FRED database is divided into these broad categories: • Money, Banking, and Finance • Population, Employment, and Labor Markets • National Accounts • Production and Business Activity • Prices • International Data • US Regional Data • Academic Data Watch this FRED introduction video (https://openstax.org/r/what-is-fred) to learn more information about how to use FRED. You can find statistics on employment, inflation, exchange rates, gross domestic product, interest rates, and many other economic variables in the FRED database. Although much of the data is about the US markets, macroeconomic data from other countries is also available. In addition to being viewable in graphical and text form on the FRED site, the data is easily downloaded into an Excel spreadsheet for analysis. LINK TO LEARNING Creating a Stacked Area Graph Not only does FRED provide an excellent source for economic data, but it allows users to create custom graphs that can be used in presentations and reports. To learn more about how to create these graphs, read this article on using stacking (https://openstax.org/r/fred-gdp-stacking). This tutorial provides step- by-step instructions for creating a stacked area graph of real GDP and its separate components and a real GDP area graph showing the percent that each of these components contributes to the total value of real GDP. 12 Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Economic Resources & Data. Accessed October 25, 2021. https://www.stlouisfed.org/ 3.6 • Sources and Characteristics of Economic Data 91