Summary of Depreciation Table 4.2 and Figure 4.16 compare the three methods discussed. Note that although each time-based (straight-line and double-declining balance) annual depreciation expense is different, after five years the total amount depreciated (accumulated depreciation) is the same. This occurs because at the end of the asset's useful life, it was expected to be worth $10,000: thus, both methods depreciated the asset's value by $48,000 over that time period. Depreciation Method Calculation Straight line Units of production Double- declining balance Table 4.2 Three Methods of Calculating Depreciation Expense Figure 4.16 Straight-Line Depreciation, Units of Production, Double-Declining Balance Method, Years 1-5 When analyzing depreciation, accountants are required to make a supportable estimate of an asset's useful life and its salvage value. However, "management teams typically fail to invest either time or attention into making or periodically revisiting and revising reasonably supportable estimates of asset lives or salvage values, or the selection of depreciation methods, as prescribed by GAAP."5 This failure is not an ethical approach to properly accounting for the use of assets. Accountants need to analyze depreciation of an asset over the entire useful life of the asset. As an asset supports the cash flow of the organization, expensing its cost needs to be allocated, not just recorded as an arbitrary calculation. An asset's depreciation may change over its life according to its use. If asset depreciation is arbitrarily determined, the recorded "gains or losses on the disposition of depreciable property assets seen in financial statements"6 are not true best estimates. Due to operational changes, the depreciation expense needs to be periodically reevaluated and adjusted. Any mischaracterization of asset usage is not proper GAAP and is not proper accrual accounting. Therefore, "financial statement preparers, as well as their accountants and auditors, should pay more attention to the quality of depreciation-related estimates and their possible mischaracterization and losses of credits and charges to operations as disposal gains."7 An accountant should always follow GAAP guidelines and allocate the expense of an asset according to its usage. 5 Howard B. Levy. "Depreciable Asset Lives: The Forgotten Estimate in GAAP." The CPA Journal. September 2016. cpajournal.com/ 2016/09/08/depreciable-asset-lives/ 6 Ibid. 120 4 • Accrual Accounting Process Access for free at openstax.org