What Is a Fixed Asset? An asset is considered a tangible asset when it is an economic resource that has physical substance-it can be seen and touched. Tangible assets can be either short term, such as inventory and supplies, or long term, such as land, buildings, and equipment. To be considered a long-term tangible asset, the item needs to be used in the normal operation of the business for more than one year, be of material value, and not be near the end of its useful life, and the company must have no plan to sell the item in the near future. The useful life is the time period over which an asset cost is allocated. Long-term tangible assets are known as fixed assets. It's also key to note that companies will capitalize a fixed asset if they have material value. A $10 stapler to be used in the office, for example, may last for years, but the value of the item is not significant enough to warrant capitalizing it. Businesses typically need many different types of these assets to meet their objectives. These assets differ from the company's products. For example, the computers that Apple, Inc. intends to sell are considered inventory (a short-term asset), whereas the computers Apple's employees use for day-to-day operations are long-term assets. In Liam's case, the new silk screen machine would be considered a long-term tangible asset as they plan to use it over many years to help generate revenue for their business. Long-term tangible assets are listed as noncurrent assets on a company's balance sheet. Typically, these assets are listed under the category of Property, Plant, and Equipment (PP&E), but they may be referred to as fixed assets or plant assets. Apple, Inc. lists a total of $36.766 million in total Property, Plant, and Equipment (net) on its September 2020 consolidated balance sheet (see Figure 4.7). As shown in the figure, this net total includes land and buildings, machinery, equipment and internal-use software, and leasehold improvements, resulting in a gross PP&E of $103.526 million-less accumulated depreciation and amortization of $66.760 million-to arrive at the net amount of $36.766 million. Figure 4.7 Apple's Property, Plant, and Equipment, Net (September 2020, in $ million)3 This report shows the company's consolidated financial statement details as of September 30, 2020, and September 30, 2019. THINK IT THROUGH Classifying Assets and Related Expenditures You work at a business consulting firm. Your new colleague, Milan, is helping a client company organize its accounting records by types of assets and expenditures. Milan is a bit stumped on how to classify certain assets and related expenditures, such as capitalized costs versus expenses. They have given you the following list and asked for your help to sort through it. Help your colleague classify the expenditures as either capitalized or expensed, and note which assets are property, plant, and equipment. Expenditures: • Normal repair and maintenance on the manufacturing facility • Cost of taxes on new equipment used in business operations • Shipping costs on new equipment used in business operations • Cost of a minor repair on existing equipment used in business operations Assets: 112 4 • Accrual Accounting Process Access for free at openstax.org