3.4 Interest Rates Learning Outcomes By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Explain the relationship between the nominal interest rate and inflation. • Calculate the real rate of interest. • Explain the relationship between interest rates and risk. Market for Loanable Funds An interest rate is the rental price of money. The concepts of supply, demand, and equilibrium apply in this market just as they do in other markets. This market is referred to as the market for loanable funds. In the market for loanable funds, the suppliers of funds are economic entities that currently have a surplus in their budget. In other words, they have more income than they currently want to spend; they would like to save some of their money and spend it in future time periods. Instead of just putting these savings in a box on a shelf for safekeeping until they want to spend it, they can let someone else borrow that money. In essence, they are renting that money to someone else, who pays a rental price called the interest rate. The suppliers of loanable funds, also known as lenders, are represented by the upward-sloping curve in Figure 3.17. A higher interest rate will encourage these lenders to supply a larger quantity of loanable funds. The demanders of funds in the loanable funds market are economic entities that currently have a deficit in their budget. They want to spend more than they currently have in income. For example, a grocery store chain that wants to expand into new cities and build new grocery stores will need to spend money on land and buildings. The cost of buying the land and buildings exceeds the chain's current income. In the long run, its business expansion will be profitable, and it can pay back the money that it has borrowed. The downward-sloping curve in Figure 3.17 represents the demanders of loanable funds, also known as borrowers. Higher interest rates will be associated with lower quantities demanded of loanable funds. At lower interest rates, more borrowers will be interested in borrowing larger quantities of funds because the price of renting those funds will be cheaper. Figure 3.17 Equilibrium in the Loanable Funds Market The equilibrium interest rate is determined by the intersection of the demand and supply curves. At that interest rate, the quantity supplied of loanable funds exactly equals the quantity demanded of loanable funds. There is no shortage of loanable funds, nor is there any surplus. 10 National Bureau of Economic Research. "US Business Cycle Expansions and Contractions." Last updated July 19, 2021. https://www.nber.org/research/data/us-business-cycle-expansions-and-contractions 86 3 • Economic Foundations: Money and Rates Access for free at openstax.org