capital, which is funds earned by the corporation as part of business operations. On the balance sheet, retained earnings is a key component of the earned capital section, while the stock accounts such as common stock, preferred stock, and additional paid-in capital are the primary components of the contributed capital section. Clear Lake Sporting Goods has just one contributed capital account-common stock-and one earned capital account-retained earnings. The equity section of its balance sheet is shown in Figure 5.9. Figure 5.9 Stockholders' Equity Section of Classified Balance Sheet THINK IT THROUGH Assets, Liability, and Equity Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and locate the company's balance sheet (the balance sheet begins on page 33). What is the amount of the company's total assets for the most recent year? What is the amount of its total liabilities and equity? Solution: Apple's total assets for 2020 were $323,888, and its total liabilities and equity were also $323,888. (Amounts are in millions.) Importance of the Balance Sheet Now that we have gone to all the work to carefully assemble a classified balance sheet, what do we use it for? The answer lies within the accounting equation itself. Think of the accounting equation from a "sources and claims" perspective. Under this approach, the assets (items owned by the organization) were obtained by incurring liabilities or were provided by owners. Stated differently, every asset has a claim against it-by creditors and/or owners. The balance sheet shows us what the firm has (its assets), who owns them (equity), and who the firm owes (its liabilities). Limitations of the Balance Sheet The balance sheet is indeed a very helpful financial statement, but it also poses challenges. First, assets on the balance sheet, under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), are recorded at historical cost. Historical cost is simply the cost paid for the item at the time it was purchased. Changes in market value of big- ticket items like land or buildings are not reflected in the balance sheet. Land remains at historical cost, and depreciable items like buildings are reflected at their current book value (historical cost less accumulated depreciation). If the asset has appreciated over time, the higher market value of the assets would not be seen on the balance sheet. Estimates are another limitation of the balance sheet. Items on the balance sheet such as allowance for doubtful accounts and allowance for bad debt are based on estimates. The useful lives for calculating depreciation is another common estimate. If these estimates are incorrect, the net value of the asset can be under- or overstated. Another key limitation is the fact that a balance sheet reflects balances at only one given point in time. This 5.2 • The Balance Sheet 137