What Is Depreciation? When a business purchases a long-term asset (used for more than one year), it classifies the asset based on whether the asset is used in the business's operations. If a long-term asset is used in the business's operations, it will belong in property, plant, and equipment or intangible assets. In this situation, the asset is typically capitalized. Capitalization is the process by which a long-term asset is recorded on the balance sheet and its allocated costs are expensed on the income statement over the asset's economic life. Long-term assets that are not used in daily operations are typically classified as an investment. For example, if a business owns land on which it operates a store, warehouse, factory, or offices, the cost of that land would be included in property, plant, and equipment. However, if a business owns a vacant piece of land on which the business conducts no operations (and assuming no current or intermediate-term plans for development), the land would be considered an investment. Depreciation is the process of allocating the cost of a tangible asset over its useful life, or the period of time that the business believes it will use the asset to help generate revenue. Fundamentals of Depreciation As you have learned, when accounting for a long-term fixed asset, we cannot simply record an expense for the cost of the asset and record the entire outflow of cash in one accounting period. Like all other assets, when you purchase or acquire a long-term asset, it must be recorded at the historical (initial) cost, which includes all costs to acquire the asset and put it into use. The initial recording of an asset has two steps: 1. Record the initial purchase on the date of purchase, which places the asset on the balance sheet (as property, plant, and equipment) at cost, and record the amount as notes payable, accounts payable, or an outflow of cash. 2. At the end of the period, make an adjusting entry to recognize the depreciation expense. Depreciation expense is the amount of the asset's cost to be recognized, or expensed, in the current period. Companies may record depreciation expense incurred annually, quarterly, or monthly. Following GAAP and the expense recognition principle, the depreciation expense is recognized over the asset's estimated useful life. Recording the Initial Asset Assets are recorded on the balance sheet at cost, meaning that all costs to purchase the asset and to prepare the asset for operation should be included. Costs outside of the purchase price may include shipping, taxes, installation, and modifications to the asset. The journal entry to record the purchase of a fixed asset (assuming that a note payable, not a short-term account payable, is used for financing) is shown in Figure 4.9. Figure 4.9 Journal Entry for Fixed Asset Applying this to Liam's silk-screening business, we learn that they purchased their silk screen machine for $54,000 by paying $10,000 cash and the remainder in a note payable over five years. The journal entry to record the purchase is shown in Figure 4.10. 114 4 • Accrual Accounting Process Access for free at openstax.org