5.4 The Statement of Owner's Equity Learning Outcomes By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Explain the concept of owner's equity. • Outline the purpose and importance of the statement of owner's equity. • Identify the structure and key elements of the statement of owner's equity. What Is Equity? Recall that the accounting equation can help us see what is owned (assets), who is owed (liabilities), and finally who the owners are (equity). The statement of owner's equity addresses the last segment of the accounting equation in detail by laying out the equity elements of the firm and highlighting changes in these elements throughout the period. Equity represents the ownership of the firm. The stockholders' equity section of the balance sheet for corporations contains two primary categories of accounts. The first is paid-in capital or contributed capital-consisting of amounts paid in by owners. The second category is earned capital, consisting of amounts earned by the corporation as part of business operations. On the balance sheet, retained earnings is a key component of the earned capital section, while the stock accounts such as common stock, preferred stock, and additional paid-in capital are the primary components of the contributed capital section. Common stock represents ownership in the firm. Common stockholders normally have voting rights. Preferred stock has unique rights that are "preferred," or more advantageous, to shareholders than common stock. Unlike common stockholders, preferred shareholders typically do not have voting rights and do not share in the common stock dividend distributions. Instead, the "preferred" classification entitles shareholders to a dividend that is fixed (assuming sufficient dividends are declared). Treasury stock is shares that were outstanding and have been repurchased by the firm but not retired. Thus they are still issued, but not outstanding. Additional paid-in capital is the difference between the issue price and par value of the common stock. For example, if a firm issued and sold stock at a market price of $20 that had a $5 par value, $5 for each share would be recorded into common stock and the excess $15 per share would be recorded into the additional paid-in capital account. If we review the balance sheet for Clear Lake Sporting Goods, we see just two elements of equity: common stock and retained earnings. Common stock in the prior year was $75,000 and increased to $80,000 in the current year, indicating Clear Lake issued additional common stock (see Figure 5.13). Figure 5.13 Stockholder Equity Section of Balance Sheet THINK IT THROUGH Equity Accounts Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and 5.4 • The Statement of Owner's Equity 141