beginning and ending balances in accounts receivable for the period. The beginning accounts receivable balance is the same figure as the ending accounts receivable balance from the prior period. When computing the accounts receivable turnover for Clear Lake Sporting Goods, let's assume net credit sales make up $100,000 of the $120,000 of the net sales found on the income statement in the current year. To gain a better understanding of its ratio performance, Clear Lake Sporting Goods can compare its turnover to industry averages, key competitors, and its own historical ratios. Given this outcome, the managers may want to consider stricter credit lending practices to make sure credit customers are of a higher quality. They may also need to be more aggressive with collecting any outstanding accounts. THINK IT THROUGH Accounts Receivable Turnover You are a consultant assessing cash management practices for two firms, Company A and Company B (see Figure 6.3). Figure 6.3 Financial Information for Company A and Company B Based on the information provided, do the following: • Compute the accounts receivable turnover ratio. • Interpret the outcomes, indicating how each company is performing Solution: Company A: times, Company B: times. Upon initial review of this limited information, Company A seems to be performing better since its turnover ratio is higher. Accounts receivable turnover has a significant impact on cash flows. One might want more information on trends for each company with these ratios and a comparison to others in the same industry. More information is helpful in assessing performance. LINK TO LEARNING American Superconductor Corporation American Superconductor Corporation specializes in the production and service of energy-efficient wind turbine systems, as well as energy grid construction solutions. On the company's 2019 financial statement (https://openstax.org/r/financial-statement), the accounts receivable turnover ratio is approximately 6.32 times. 6.2 • Operating Efficiency Ratios 169