3.5 Foreign Exchange Rates Learning Outcomes By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Explain what it means for a currency to appreciate or depreciate. • Define spot exchange rate. • Explain the risks involved in translation exposure. Spot Exchange Rate An exchange rate is simply the price of a currency. If you live in the United States and are going on a trip to Mexico, you will need pesos to pay for your food, hotel, and other items. You will need to purchase pesos. Suppose that you go to your bank to purchase pesos. Suppose the bank tells you that it will cost $0.0625 to purchase one Mexican peso. If you want to take 10,000 Mexican pesos with you on your trip, it will cost you $625 to purchase the desired pesos. In this example, the price of one peso is six and one-quarter cents. This price will often be written in the form of MXN is an abbreviation for the Mexican peso, and USD is an abbreviation for the US dollar. This price is known as a currency exchange rate, or the rate at which you can exchange one currency for another currency. Because this is the price you would pay to purchase Mexican pesos right now, it is known as the spot exchange rate. If you know the price of Mexican pesos in dollars, you can easily find the price of US dollars in Mexican pesos. Simply divide both sides of the equation by 0.0625, or the price of a peso: If you have Mexican pesos and you want to exchange them for dollars, you will be using the pesos to buy dollars. Each US dollar will cost you MXN 16. LINK TO LEARNING Currency Conversion Do you want to know how many British pounds your $100 would buy? Or would you like to see how much that 10,000-yen-per-night hotel room will cost you in your home currency? You can enter the amount of one currency in the MSN Money currency converter (https://openstax.org/r/currencyconverter) to see what the equivalent amount is in another currency. Currency Appreciation Just as the price of gasoline changes, resulting in it costing more to purchase gasoline on some visits to the gas station than on other visits, the price of a currency also changes. Currency appreciation occurs when it costs more to purchase a currency than it did before. If the next time you go to the bank to purchase pesos, the bank quotes an exchange rate of , it means that it now costs $0.0800 (up from $0.0625) to purchase a Mexican peso. Hence, the price of a peso has risen, or the peso has appreciated. 3.5 • Foreign Exchange Rates 89