sell. Another type of firm is a service firm. A law office, for example, would include primarily the cost of labor in their cost of services. Gross profit is a reflection of how profitable the firm's performance was in its core business function. It includes only the core business and direct costs of performing that business. If the company were a shoe company, gross profit would show how profitable the company was in simply making the shoes it sold. If it were a bakery, gross profit would show how profitable the company was in simply baking the goods it sold. Gross profit shows financial statement users how effective the business is at generating top-line profits on their core business function. It does not reflect the performance of other areas of the firm such as other operating costs to support the direct production process, indirect costs, and financing. For Clear Lake Sporting Goods, we see its gross profit in Figure 5.2. The company earned $50,000 of gross profit the prior year and $60,000 in the current year . Figure 5.2 Income Statement through Gross Profit Line LINK TO LEARNING Gross Profit Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and locate the income statement (it begins on page 31). Review gross sales, sales returns and allowances, and net sales for the last few years. What can you learn about the company's recent performance in the area of sales? Is the gross sales line improving? How about the sales returns and allowances line? Has it improved or declined or simply changed incrementally with gross sales? Review the firm's gross profit for the past few years. Has it improved or declined? Consider the company's improvement (or decline) in gross sales as compared to the improvement or decline in gross profit. Does it reflect any change in performance over time (earning more or less gross profit on its gross sales)? Income from Operations Gross profit is a very helpful measure, but it is only the first of several provided by the income statement. After gross profit is calculated, other operating expenses are deducted in order to calculate the firm's income from operations, also commonly called operating income. Common operating costs found in this section include building rent and utilities, property taxes, wages and salaries, and other overhead costs. In Figure 5.3, we can see Clear Lake's operating expenses. To sell its hunting and fishing equipment in the current year, Clear Lake Sporting Goods paid rent for its building ($5,500) and utilities for its retail and warehouse spaces ($2,500); recorded depreciation on equipment, buildings, and store furnishings (shelves, racks, etc.) ($3,600); and paid salaries to its indirect employees in accounting, purchasing, and human resources ($5,400). The company's operating expenses are deducted from gross profit to arrive at operating income While gross profit reflects only how profitable the firm was in making its core product, operating income 5.1 • The Income Statement 131