6.6 Profitability Ratios and the DuPont Method By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Calculate profit margin to determine how much sales revenues the firm has translated into income. • Evaluate firm performance by calculating return on total assets and return on equity. • Analyze organizational performance using DuPont method calculations. Profitability considers how well a company produces returns given its operational performance. The company needs to use its assets and operations efficiently to increase profit. To assist with profit goal attainment, company revenues need to outweigh expenses. Let's consider three profitability measurements and ratios: profit margin, return on total assets, and return on equity. Profit Margin Profit margin represents how much of sales revenue has translated into income. This ratio shows how much of each $1 of sales is returned as profit. The larger the ratio figure (the closer it gets to 1), the more of each sales dollar is returned as profit. The portion of the sales dollar not returned as profit goes toward expenses. The formula for profit margin is For Clear Lake Sporting Goods, the profit margin in the current year is This means that for every dollar of sales, $0.29 returns as profit. If Clear Lake Sporting Goods thinks this is too low, the company would try to find ways to reduce expenses and increase sales. Return on Total Assets The return on total assets measures the company's ability to use its assets successfully to generate a profit. The higher the return (ratio outcome), the more profit is created from asset use. Average total assets are found by dividing the sum of beginning and ending total assets balances found on the balance sheet. The beginning total assets balance in the current year is taken from the ending total assets balance in the prior year. The formula for return on total assets is For Clear Lake Sporting Goods, the return on total assets for the current year is The higher the figure, the better the company is using its assets to create a profit. Industry standards can dictate what an acceptable return is. 182 6 • Measures of Financial Health Access for free at openstax.org